Surrogate Safety Measures (SSMs) play a crucial role in today’s road safety analysis and the development of autonomous driving safety. However, traditional SSMs, such as Time-to-Collision (TTC), face challenges in addressing multi-angle conflicts in a two-dimensional (2D) plane. In recent years, some SSMs have emerged that combine metrics or extend through vectorization to evaluate collision risks in 2D spaces. Yet, these methods still have three main limitations: (i) Incomplete preconditions of SSMs can lead to unidentified vehicle conflicts; (ii) Extending TTC-based logic to a 2D plane may lead to optimistic risk estimates; (iii) They often fail to accurately reflect the impact of evasive maneuvers on risk levels. To address these issues, this paper proposes a novel SSM named the Emergency Index (EI), providing unique insights into crash avoidance strategies. EI focuses on two aspects: (i) the necessary adjustments for pre-collision states, i.e., Interaction Depth(Inter-D); (ii) the time available for evasive actions, i.e., Time-to-Depth-Maximum (TDM). Additionally, a Conflict Detection Model (CDM) is introduced to comprehensively screen potential conflict vehicles. Case studies reveal that: (i) Our proposed CDM reduces the occurrence of undetected conflicts; (ii) EI accurately reflects the impact of evasive maneuvers on risk. Finally, using a large dataset of real vehicle crash-conflict data and ROC curves, the classification capability of EI for crash-conflict events is validated. Results show that the AUC values for EI are 1.08\% and 3.13\% higher than those for ACT and 2D-TTC, respectively, indicating that EI provides a better representation of vehicle risk.
